README.md, before:

# Unicode Titlecase

[![GitHub Workflow Status](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/Teh-Bobo/unicode-title-case/rust.yml?branch=master)](https://github.com/Teh-Bobo/unicode-title-case/actions)
[![docs.rs](https://img.shields.io/docsrs/unicode_titlecase)](https://docs.rs/unicode_titlecase/latest/unicode_titlecase/)
![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/l/unicode_titlecase)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/unicode_titlecase)](https://crates.io/crates/unicode_titlecase)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Unicode_Version-16.0.0-blue)](https://www.unicode.org/Public/16.0.0/)
![](https://img.shields.io/badge/-no__std-green)
![](https://img.shields.io/badge/-forbid__unsafe-green)

Unicode titlecasing operations for chars and strings.
This crate supports the additional functionality needed to handle TR and AZ locales.

## Usage

### Chars

To turn a ```char``` into its titlecase equivalent ```[char; 3]```array:

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::to_titlecase;

assert_eq!(to_titlecase('A'), ['A', '\0', '\0']);
assert_eq!(to_titlecase('Ǆ'), ['ǅ', '\0', '\0']);
assert_eq!(to_titlecase('ﬄ'), ['F', 'f', 'l']);
```

Or use the iterator version that follows the same format as the std library. The crate defines
a ```Trait``` that is implemented on ```char```:

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::TitleCase;
assert_eq!('i'.to_titlecase().to_string(), "I");
assert_eq!('A'.to_titlecase().to_string(), "A");
assert_eq!('Ǆ'.to_titlecase().to_string(), "ǅ");
assert_eq!('ﬄ'.to_titlecase().to_string(), "Ffl");
```

### Strings

A similar trait is defined on ```str```. This
will titlecase the first char of the string, leave the rest unchanged, and return a newly
allocated ```String```.

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::StrTitleCase;
assert_eq!("iii".to_titlecase(), "Iii");
assert_eq!("ABC".to_titlecase(), "ABC");
assert_eq!("ǄǄ".to_titlecase(), "ǅǄ");
assert_eq!("ﬄabc".to_titlecase(), "Fflabc");
```

Alternatively, you could lowercase the rest of the ```str```:

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::StrTitleCase;
assert_eq!("iIi".to_titlecase_lower_rest(), "Iii");
assert_eq!("ABC".to_titlecase_lower_rest(), "Abc");
assert_eq!("ǄǄ".to_titlecase_lower_rest(), "ǅǆ");
assert_eq!("ﬄabc".to_titlecase_lower_rest(), "Fflabc");
```

### Testing a char or str

To see if the char is already titlecase, ```is_titlecase``` is provided:

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::TitleCase;
assert!('A'.is_titlecase());
assert!('ǅ'.is_titlecase());
assert!('İ'.is_titlecase());

assert!(!'a'.is_titlecase());
assert!(!'Ǆ'.is_titlecase());
assert!(!'ﬄ'.is_titlecase());
```

To test if a str is already titlecase, two options are provided. The first, ```starts_titlecase```
returns true if the first character is titlecased--ignoring the rest of the str. The second
```starts_titlecase_rest_lower``` only returns true if the first char is titlecase and the rest
of the str is lowercase.

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::StrTitleCase;
assert!("Abc".starts_titlecase());
assert!("ABC".starts_titlecase());
assert!(!"abc".starts_titlecase());

assert!("Abc".starts_titlecase_rest_lower());
assert!("İbc".starts_titlecase_rest_lower());
assert!(!"abc".starts_titlecase_rest_lower());
assert!(!"ABC".starts_titlecase_rest_lower());
assert!(!"İİ".starts_titlecase_rest_lower());
```

All testing functions work the same regardless of locale.

### Locale

The Turkish and Azeri (TR/AZ) locales have different rules for how to titlecase certain characters.
The ```to_titlecase``` functions assume the locale is neither of these locations. A "tr_or_az"
version of each function is provided instead.

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::{to_titlecase_tr_or_az, StrTitleCase, TitleCase};
assert_eq!(to_titlecase_tr_or_az('i'), ['İ', '\0', '\0']);
assert_eq!('i'.to_titlecase_tr_or_az().to_string(), "İ");
assert_eq!("iIi".to_titlecase_tr_or_az(), "İIi");
assert_eq!("iIi".to_titlecase_tr_or_az_lower_rest(), "İıi");
```

Additionally, there are upper and lower case utilities for the Turkish and Azeri located in the ```tr_az``` module.

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::tr_az::{to_uppercase_tr_or_az, to_lowercase_tr_or_az, StrTrAzCasing};
assert_eq!(to_uppercase_tr_or_az('i').to_string(), "İ");
assert_eq!(to_lowercase_tr_or_az('I'), 'ı');
assert_eq!("İIAb".to_lowercase_tr_az(), "iıab");
assert_eq!("iıab".to_uppercase_tr_az(), "İIAB");
```

## License

Licensed under either of

* Apache License, Version 2.0
  ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
* MIT license
  ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

at your option.

## Contribution

Unless you explicitly state otherwise, any contribution intentionally submitted
for inclusion in the work by you, as defined in the Apache-2.0 license, shall be
dual licensed as above, without any additional terms or conditions.

Commit message:

Add link to decasify for prose handling

README.md, after:

# Unicode Titlecase

[![GitHub Workflow Status](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/Teh-Bobo/unicode-title-case/rust.yml?branch=master)](https://github.com/Teh-Bobo/unicode-title-case/actions)
[![docs.rs](https://img.shields.io/docsrs/unicode_titlecase)](https://docs.rs/unicode_titlecase/latest/unicode_titlecase/)
![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/l/unicode_titlecase)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/unicode_titlecase)](https://crates.io/crates/unicode_titlecase)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Unicode_Version-16.0.0-blue)](https://www.unicode.org/Public/16.0.0/)
![](https://img.shields.io/badge/-no__std-green)
![](https://img.shields.io/badge/-forbid__unsafe-green)

Unicode titlecasing operations for chars and strings.
This crate supports the additional functionality needed to handle TR and AZ locales.

Note this crate operates on strings as single words or tokens; it does not handle the gramatical rules to title-case longer strings of text.
To handle prose such as titles, see the [decasify](https://github.com/alerque/decasify) crate.
It uses this crate for re-casing each word, but additionally looks for gramatical clues in the context of longer strings and applies language specific style guides, including Turkish support.

## Usage

### Chars

To turn a ```char``` into its titlecase equivalent ```[char; 3]```array:

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::to_titlecase;

assert_eq!(to_titlecase('A'), ['A', '\0', '\0']);
assert_eq!(to_titlecase('Ǆ'), ['ǅ', '\0', '\0']);
assert_eq!(to_titlecase('ﬄ'), ['F', 'f', 'l']);
```

Or use the iterator version that follows the same format as the std library. The crate defines
a ```Trait``` that is implemented on ```char```:

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::TitleCase;
assert_eq!('i'.to_titlecase().to_string(), "I");
assert_eq!('A'.to_titlecase().to_string(), "A");
assert_eq!('Ǆ'.to_titlecase().to_string(), "ǅ");
assert_eq!('ﬄ'.to_titlecase().to_string(), "Ffl");
```

### Strings

A similar trait is defined on ```str```. This
will titlecase the first char of the string, leave the rest unchanged, and return a newly
allocated ```String```.

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::StrTitleCase;
assert_eq!("iii".to_titlecase(), "Iii");
assert_eq!("ABC".to_titlecase(), "ABC");
assert_eq!("ǄǄ".to_titlecase(), "ǅǄ");
assert_eq!("ﬄabc".to_titlecase(), "Fflabc");
```

Alternatively, you could lowercase the rest of the ```str```:

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::StrTitleCase;
assert_eq!("iIi".to_titlecase_lower_rest(), "Iii");
assert_eq!("ABC".to_titlecase_lower_rest(), "Abc");
assert_eq!("ǄǄ".to_titlecase_lower_rest(), "ǅǆ");
assert_eq!("ﬄabc".to_titlecase_lower_rest(), "Fflabc");
```

### Testing a char or str

To see if the char is already titlecase, ```is_titlecase``` is provided:

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::TitleCase;
assert!('A'.is_titlecase());
assert!('ǅ'.is_titlecase());
assert!('İ'.is_titlecase());

assert!(!'a'.is_titlecase());
assert!(!'Ǆ'.is_titlecase());
assert!(!'ﬄ'.is_titlecase());
```

To test if a str is already titlecase, two options are provided. The first, ```starts_titlecase```
returns true if the first character is titlecased--ignoring the rest of the str. The second
```starts_titlecase_rest_lower``` only returns true if the first char is titlecase and the rest
of the str is lowercase.

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::StrTitleCase;
assert!("Abc".starts_titlecase());
assert!("ABC".starts_titlecase());
assert!(!"abc".starts_titlecase());

assert!("Abc".starts_titlecase_rest_lower());
assert!("İbc".starts_titlecase_rest_lower());
assert!(!"abc".starts_titlecase_rest_lower());
assert!(!"ABC".starts_titlecase_rest_lower());
assert!(!"İİ".starts_titlecase_rest_lower());
```

All testing functions work the same regardless of locale.

### Locale

The Turkish and Azeri (TR/AZ) locales have different rules for how to titlecase certain characters.
The ```to_titlecase``` functions assume the locale is neither of these locations. A "tr_or_az"
version of each function is provided instead.

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::{to_titlecase_tr_or_az, StrTitleCase, TitleCase};
assert_eq!(to_titlecase_tr_or_az('i'), ['İ', '\0', '\0']);
assert_eq!('i'.to_titlecase_tr_or_az().to_string(), "İ");
assert_eq!("iIi".to_titlecase_tr_or_az(), "İIi");
assert_eq!("iIi".to_titlecase_tr_or_az_lower_rest(), "İıi");
```

Additionally, there are upper and lower case utilities for the Turkish and Azeri located in the ```tr_az``` module.

```rust
use unicode_titlecase::tr_az::{to_uppercase_tr_or_az, to_lowercase_tr_or_az, StrTrAzCasing};
assert_eq!(to_uppercase_tr_or_az('i').to_string(), "İ");
assert_eq!(to_lowercase_tr_or_az('I'), 'ı');
assert_eq!("İIAb".to_lowercase_tr_az(), "iıab");
assert_eq!("iıab".to_uppercase_tr_az(), "İIAB");
```

## License

Licensed under either of

* Apache License, Version 2.0
  ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
* MIT license
  ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

at your option.

## Contribution

Unless you explicitly state otherwise, any contribution intentionally submitted
for inclusion in the work by you, as defined in the Apache-2.0 license, shall be
dual licensed as above, without any additional terms or conditions.
